An array is a collection of items of the same data type stored at contiguous memory locations. This makes it easier to calculate the position of each element by simply adding an offset to a base value, i.e., the memory location of the first element of the array (generally denoted by the name of the array).

For simplicity, we can think of an array as a fleet of stairs where on each step a value is placed (let’s say one of your friends). Here, you can identify the location of any of your friends by simply knowing the count of the step that they are on.

Remember: “Location of the next index depends on the data type that we use”.

Defining an Array: Array definition is similar to defining any other variable. There are two things that are needed to be kept in mind, the data type of the array elements and the size of the array. The size of the array is fixed and the memory for an array needs to be allocated before use, the size of an array cannot be increased or decreased dynamically.

Accessing array elements: Arrays allows to access elements randomly. Elements in an array can be accessed using indexes. Suppose an array named arr stores N elements. Indexes in an array are in the range of 0 to N-1, where the first element is present at 0-th index and consecutive elements are placed at consecutive indexes. Element present at ith index in the array arr[] can be accessed as arr[i].

Advantages of using arrays:
Arrays allow random access of elements. This makes accessing elements by their position faster.
Arrays have better cache locality that can make a pretty big difference in performance.

Searching in an Array

Searching for an element in an array means to check if a given element is present in the array or not. This can be done by accessing elements of the array one by one starting from the first element and checking whether any of the elements matches with the given element.

We can use loops to perform the above operation of array traversal and access the elements, using indexes.

Suppose the array is named arr[] with size N and the element to be searched is referred to as key. Below is the algorithm to perform the search operation in the given array.

for(i = 0; i < N; i++)
{
    if(arr[i] == key)
    { 
        print "Element Found";
    }
    else
    {
        print "Element not Found";
    }
}

Time Complexity of this search operation will be O(N) in the worst case as we are checking every element of the array from 1st to last, so the number of operations is N.

Insertion in Arrays
Given an array of a given size. The task is to insert a new element in this array. There are two possible ways of inserting elements in an array:
Insert elements at the end of the array.
Insert element at any given index in the array.
